tonight eh it starts I don't know how long it
will last but it starts a series that I want to
call we can do more more in which
Let's go back to talking about code eh Let's go back
to talking about let's say about my
favorite language of the language that
fed me for the  first 20
years of career ehm and I would like Since I have
announced several times that I would like to return
to writing code to talk about code let's
start calmly calmly talking about
it let's talk about it then then we will
also write code he says why c+ Plus Well it
was a bit of a circumstance  I mean,
a video came out a few days ago
about about about about about the fact that the um Where is
the The Us government wants developer
to stop using CNC Plus Plus I
posted a video on my channel
reacting to this this article from the
de Register  uh I'll show you the video right away
now I should go and look for it but
it's complicated that's okay and and and nothing
in the commenting on it I had I had also
said so jokingly maybe I hear
my friend Marco foco that you have already seen
you have already seen on the channel as in
a  'interview a while ago
a while ago  uh from zero to manager
viia This is an interview I
did with him when he
was a almost two years ago Almost two years
ago it was March 23 the good Marco Marco
my friend dear friend Marco foco he he
has much more depth of knowledge
than  to me on the subject
and Pascal the
next one and then he wrote to me
because when I when I mention him he
has his little birds that tell him Hey
Rip T he mentioned and writes to me he says
Giorgio but I saw the link Come on let's
talk about it and it falls right at  bean
because he is writing something
about it what exactly is
mentioned on this article that I
did Perfect Ok it can be done it can be
done more more ehm said this Eh I
said to myself people ask for Foco and
give them foco that would be beautiful Who knows
how many  times this joke has been made
I imagine then then then
ehm obviously Obviously the challenge is to get
passionate about those who don't know
programming I don't know if today is the
right day because today we go into a bit of
detail actually Marco also has
some very interesting slides that he has
shown at an event with the other friend
Marco Marco Arena who has various  Community
on programming ehm small
small premise a little bit of my history
on c+ Plus I wrote in c+ Plus from PR
standard the first standard If I'm not
mistaken it's c+ Plus 988 ehm 98 Yes if I'm not
mistaken now Marco will correct me
he knows the whole story I  I write from
prest standard prest standard and so on
I worked in c+ exclusively in c+
Plus from from from from immediately after I taught
Commodor 64 basic in first C and then
c+ Plus until 2012 until I joined
Google from joining Google  I
continued to work a bit in c+ plus
and my skills reached up to
what was the standard pre c+ Plus
0x it was called at the time so there was
a big measure refactoring of the
language which then became c+ Plus V
ehm and  so for
example I have never used some constructs of c+11
professionally because Google was
very slow to adopt the new
standard c+plus you should know that
almost every company that uses
c+plus writes code. Yes yes  remakes a
subset of its own let's say of
constructs Eh that allows to use
in the internal coding standards and and
rejects others Google was very very
defensive and therefore it is necessary to adopt
innovations of the new language standard
then eh waited it seems strange but
other languages ​​the new library comes out
eh let's use it How nice c+ Plus is a
bit strange because anyway it has a long
history backwards compatibility bla bla bla
that said that said It
's not said It's not said It's not
said before F enter the good Marco
I just wanted to remind you that c+ plus
exists  in memory for a long time obviously and
its founder is obviously
biarnes trustrup Who is biarne trustrup now
I'll show you a photo where
you can see Perhaps what we can
define as the most influential figure
ever of c+ Plus the man who brought
the  c+ plus at a level at a
very high level and next to him bernes
trustrup you can see this here is in
Google a photo taken I think a little
blurry 30 kg ago but anyway ok
apart from this
here the
[ __ ] let's give space
to the good Marco  Marco fire Welcome back
how are you Good evening I noticed that I have the
same shirt as the other time so
embarrassed you are very recognizable you are very
recognizable It's true It's true It's true
that I have the longest hair but the
shirt is the same Yes it's true it's true
ok How are you  Marco Well well ok I'm just
back from a few events of the
c+ Plus committee so I'm fresh on
these things he took a microphone back I'm
sick if he took the microphone back I'm
sick well I don't know I'm not completely
convinced I'm not completely convinced but
do a couple of tests on the fly  while I take then
I immediately say no I don't think so I can
try to move the microphone no it's
okay it's okay ok Mag my my perception
my perception
So Marco nothing so we
spoke
because I read this article and you
immediately gave me you bombarded me with
technical things you told me no no Look,
in reality in a month I'm going to go to
Working Group 21 What exactly are you going to do
Yes yes okay
Eh I'll explain to you I mean if you want I'll explain to you
with the slides too I have some specific
slides that explain who what  I'm going
to do it What a coincidence are we showing her?
then Ok go ok Go then
standardization commitee That is
what I'm going to do I'm going to see
what What how to evolve c+ Plus
and I'll touch you right away because then I'll break
your B's a lot today um we can go
one more go up even higher c  'there are
people here who don't even have an idea of ​​what
we're talking about Ah standardization
Commit what are we talking about
So c+ Plus c+ Plus is a language it was
born in the 80s it was also called
differently and it was born
simply because as said stop l  '
he invented it he wrote it well done
TNT he needed some things he wanted to
have a c that however allowed him to
have a bit of a bit of safety
Paradoxically c+ Plus As the
main version was Safety was the fact of
to be more type safe and to allow you
to build some abstractions like
object programming but also other
types of programming
object programming was not the only one
generic programming was another
so there were a few eh paradigms
that wanted that  he wanted to add
al to the C language and c+ was born which
at the time it was called if with classes if
with classes ok And it wasn't even a
compiler But it was a preprocessor Oh
fantastic all done with macros with
defines No it was yes it was practically a
thing that eh ate this language
if with classes and spat out  C code
which was then compiled by a
C compiler
ok So this is how the compiler was born
then there were the various
implementations of C there was a
period of 15 years where there was a bit
of anarchy i.e. each  came out with
his c+ Plus there was the borland c+ plus bor
mom what memories I can't remember
too many memories c+ Plus there were a few
and each one had its own a its own
subset of functionality its own its
own extensions  And until a certain
point the need was felt to
standardize, unify, standardize
and the standardization committee was born.
Ok
in So the standardization committee was born, I
don't know exactly what year it was born.
But you know, I can try to see if I
put the  slide Ah look now
no in the meantime this one here is okay This one here
is a  a little bit what do
I do the first part of the slides we have to
start from a baseline But guys
I admit that if we have to get to say
What is a bite We have a lot of
difficulty But maybe we try to
put ourselves in the shoes of young people No
young people that that that is not an idea that is a
compiler compiler is a question
because now there are many languages
that are interpreted one writes it makes the
interpreter eat it which is the
development environment like Python like Node js or
things like that and the program is
executed natively but the computer
speaks a language
different It speaks what is called
machine language
and the compiler is something that in front
of a that is, it takes a source in a
language like C and transforms it into
machine language to prepare it for a
very fast execution while
interpreters like Python and JavaScript are
more  slow generally because they go
to analyze the language on the fly and
understand what they have to do at that moment
clear clear compiled languages
are generally faster so
Ok ok essentially in a
compiled language it is possible
to find errors during compilation Eh with the
interpreted language there is a risk that
the error is found at the time
of execution So coiner is also
you friend others  things yes Among other things
yes yes yes Then then there are various
levels of safety various levels of
typing that give you more or less
certainty including Well while we're at it let's
also talk about Rust which was
created precisely to
have certain characteristics of
very advanced security That is, if it is
difficult to compile Rust, it is more
difficult than other languages. But
if it compiles, you have many more guarantees that
what you have written is
correct, correct, that is, you mean yes, correct,
correct. In the sense that you cannot,
for
example,
do strange things with the  contention
between various Trades That is, there are some
technicalities to see there or in any case
the memory is also managed in a Safe way
there is no risk that you do buffer
overflow there are not a series of things
that are G logic errors
Of course a language cannot solve them for you.
Logic errors cannot be solved for you,
but it can solve many errors that are
in CN c+ Plus. But even in other
languages ​​there are errors and they are
complicated to find, for example those
of Race condition on  on Trade
So there are some perfect things some
interesting things taken off the table the
difference between compiler and Inter c+
is a compiled language obviously
written let's say on top of C even if
then the standardizations proceed on
separate binary paths however for retroc
compalit from a a a code
a a
file a source file in C is also
compilable in c+ Plus in theory almost
always almost always almost always there are
a  a few differences there are a few
differences but oh well if if we get
to look at the slides Yes yes yes perfect let's
go back to the slides ok
Well what do I do it was it was we were at the
point of what do I do the Timeline
of things Timeline Ah the Timeline  some
things ok Okay then Let's start from here
Oh well here when I was born I
moved to Switzerland in 2015 Now
I'm in Switzerland in Lugano Marco you're 50
eh I'm 50 This year yes I'm
old they do it they do it
So occasionally I speak in Italian
in  english in fact because usually it's
c+ you speak in c+ So In fact I made
a Timeline of the languages ​​I
learned in 76 Italian in 83
Basic Logo I put 83 as the date But
there's a bit more stuff  6502 English
English I learned it to learn
The ones above because the documentation of
all the various languages ​​was only in
English Then we were talking about Turbo
before if you want we can start talking
about Turbo Pascal too there's no problem I learned it to learn The ones above because the documentation of all the various languages ​​was only in English Then we were talking about Turbo before if you want we can start talking about Turbo Pascal too there's no problem I learned it to learn The ones above because the documentation of all the various languages ​​was only in English Then we were talking about Turbo Pascal ...
I also did that Visual Basic
which paid for my whole university
so I never skimp on Visual Basic in
what sense did it pay you because you were working
in the meantime in the meantime I was doing
consultancy in Visual Basic it was
fantastic something I did in my
spare time but it paid me
university 95 c+ is Java Why c+
Because I needed it for fun
Eh I made demos Ah you made demos Yes
yes damn computer graphics dem I had
tried to make them in Pascale assembly it was
a mess I found this watcom c+ Plus
that worked well
and  c+ Plus and Java instead because those
for whom I did consultancy in Visual
Basic paid me to learn Java
and I said Why not? I'll see the questions
and I'm saving some for later. I can't
interrupt Marco every 3 seconds.
No, then in 2007 I learned  matlab
because they also helped me there  wanted to pay
to learn it
and 2010 they paid me to learn vhdl
and in 2016 Python is German Oh even
German learned
no started to study it Ok look I
learned it more now that I'm in
Ticino than when I was in Zurich
So then  And what do I do Okay I
do a little bit of a little bit of Hobby
let's go I mean you wait are you studying
to become a pilot Ok I
forgot But so in my spare time I'm
also doing that
Ok but repairing computers is also a one thing
one thing  of the things I'm doing
now I have two blogs one in Italian and one
in English actually they are the same but
I translate every now and then articles from one
language
to another I also do a bit of
streaming and I do some self-promotion
here so actually  stream little it
's not true eh I stream little and badly in fact
and
then by chance I am also I also do
this but oh well it's not there and instead the thing
perhaps most important for which I am here
is the head of delegation
of the Iso IC jtc1 c22
wg21 which is not  the cat that walks
on the keyboard  never the name of the
general committee of standardization
commonly known as Working Group 21
Exactly that vg21 stands for
Working Group 21 in the past I had been
part of a similar association for
Java Ok ok What is this stuff here what is this
this acronym  bad
because of Elephant in the room
So Iso we probably know it Ok
IC is the electrical engineering part of of of of
Iso Ok all IT falls within
electrical engineering for
historical reasons jtc One is actually the
IT part i.e. the joint
Technical committee number 1  is the one that
deals with information technology
subcommittee 22 deals with programming
languages ​​and then finally there is Working
group1 six levels of hierarchy and with
two-digit numbers how many under Iso
how much stuff is there everything exactly good good
question because okay in the meantime  How do you
become the head of an
Italian delegation? It's quite simple. You create the
delegation. That is, there is no one. You create it as the
head of the
delegation. Ok. That's it.
Ok. There are other things active
on the island.
Another Working Group.
Perfect. So there are a few more.
languages ​​that  they are still in development
fortran is still being developed C is being
developed it is called Working group 14 and
there is also a group that deals with
vulnerabilities of specific languages
specific languages ​​In fact
they told me that cob is also being actively
developed C I had absolutely no
idea  there is in this slide Because they
told me
yes then it is possible to develop
a language all your own eh
absolutely but you don't want to have the
ISO committee in the middle
Probably because the ISO committee
puts a few problems in the middle
that is we have standardized  c+ Plus
23 in November 2 20 23 We
closed sipl tri November 2023 the
time it took ISO to do all
the voting and get to produce the
official standardization document
of c+ Plus 23 was practically a
year in November around  in November 2024
the official standard document finally arrived
So better than just
inside the end we are close to an
official launch of something
important
So the committee is made up of
real people I mean there are this one here is one of the
first meetings of the
standardization committee  1990 for  answer
your question before then I see
biarne there in the middle biarne there in the middle but
he's so young that I don't recognize
him Ah it's not that one Anyway there's a bit I
recognize
alexandrescu No this one here wait
this one here is Oh yes there is  I have it I
have it I have it I wrote it accelerated c+ Plus
Andrew kenig this one in front that
looks like Tip Yes And look I don't know them
all well by face So also
because I'm hopeless with names but then
we finally have one of
approval of c+ Plus came after
21 years unfortunately there is
no photo of the 98 one and of
another intermediate version which is less
famous which is a Fix of c+ Plus 98 And which
is c+ 03 03
Yes ok and and then  the committee has
grown in the meantime because c+ 14 Eh
we are already a little more people 17 there is
even more gvan winkel the great
Dutchman who in Google was the boss of C
Plus Plus is the one who St a little in the
center of the  white shirt he is a bit of
a legend m Yes yes there is there in fact I find him
every time in fact I found him
last time right next to me eh and eh
on the u17 this acona in Hawaii and
I wasn't there  even if I was already part of the
ambaradan there was not yet the
Italian delegation it does not become more
difficult to make decisions with too many
people and this is the 20th and here
we are finally eh A few Italians
highlighted there are this was the part
of the  Italian delegation that was there
at the time and the c+ 23 was hybrid
so there were some
people there and some
people every 3 years every 3 years there is a
new standardization process I
I am more  or less here behind because you can't
see me but in Wait
we'll
show you and nothing So what does it do And
when does the committee do it What does these
things do when when does it operate So the
work it does is to develop
new versions of c+ Plus and  to understand if
there are problems and solve them ok And
when he
does it originally they were meetings  in person
three times a year only those and in those
meetings a week of time we
worked and we and we produced the
standards and then the rest of the work
was done via email period ok a
week at the end it's a
damn job I mean who How  there was some sort of
compensation or even at work how does one
take holidays So it depends it
depends on your agreements with the company
eh If the company decides to
sponsor it it is happy but more or less
maybe it allows you not to take
holidays but  but you pay for the trip yourself you
pay for the accommodation yourself If the company doesn't
care they tell you you take the
holidays it's your problem Ok so it depends on
direct agreements with the company and maybe
within the company itself There are
people who  I am in one way and
people are in another way eh that is
clear and I imagine it is also a bit of
prestige to be part of the
standardizations and so on Yes but
sometimes it is also interesting for the
work you do sometimes not that is for
example in  my current role in my
previous role it was completely
irrelevant that I was
on the c+ Plus committee because I was in
charge  of ai and the code that c+ Plus
that he was working on My team was an
Epsilon of the
total work since last year since
we last spoke I have
changed jobs I have moved
back that is in quotes because
many consider the i  like the frontier
And instead I went back to the rear
and I deal with one of the basic libraries
for a project called Omniverse
it was the same project I was working on
before but now I deal with the
basic libraries in c+ plus So it's a
job  which is a little more connected to
what I do I went back to
writing code and then a team of
people who can write code maybe
even better than me
so I can also afford to do
record reviews of
nice code Ok anyway during the pandemic we
went through  always three times a year
a week but by teleconference
And this thing was liked and after the
pandemic the meetings were always held
in hybrid it's always a week
the meeting from Monday to Saturday ok But
you can also do you can do a
remote attendance  instead of giving
person ok So I guess that
when you get there there is already an agenda
With what is there to do
discuss asynchronously everything
else the preparation of the Papers must
take place first That is, all
the proposals are formalised in a
Paper and are sent four
weeks at least four weeks before
the meeting ok I imagine then it will be on
Monday
Ok Monday because then in February there will be  'there is
the
delat meeting and I imagine that then the output of the delat
meeting of the committee C every 3
years Then there is actually So every
nine Meetings there is an update of the
language this is will always happen
like this or S  so every Meeting there is
an update of the Working draft
which is the working document and that is
the current version of the Standard which
will be published in this case in
2026 ok
Eh because we have 3-year cycles
and therefore we have just published c+  23
and the next one is
Ok specifically between the
previous meeting and this one the proposals are closed
i.e. let's say that no
more proposals are accepted because the
path to get a
proposal into the standard is quite
long in fact I'll explain it a bit later and
and  so it makes no sense to accept in
2025 something that has to be finished has to
be done and finished in the standard in
2026 so basically there are three
meetings for To have new things for three
four meetings to put new things
in the standard and the rest is a
refinement a a ok So now we are in the
hot phase That is, we are still in the meetings
great Yes yes yes yes Let's move on
let's move on Ok how does it work So
exactly The cycle is 3 years from the new
version objectives are set
these are
usually not there is not a committee that
decides the objectives there are some
people who propose Ono they write a
document in which they propose some
objectives that according to them a new
version of c+ Plus should have but
usually they are natural persons or they are
companies through people or they are
governments through people usually they are
No usually they are
natural persons usually they are natural
persons Often they are natural persons connected
with some  company Ok but it's not
necessarily the big company
i.e. one of the people who always has
his say on the Su what
the new version should have a
historical member of the committee and I won't
even try to say the name because he's
Finnish so it's a mess  But it is
one of the main engineers of cute
the QT library Ah QT ok So it is not
a Microsoft or a Google but  it is
also a relatively small company
obviously a company that invests
but it is not a
huge company However after the definition of
Target
everyone writes proposals that are
then voted on by the committee and if they are
voted on to go into the standard
then they end up in the standard  at the
end of the Standard at the end of the 3 years
there is a final vote that says ok
This is really the document that
we want to publish ok So there is no
phase of no the proposals do not come
then there are amendments the
proposals in the cycle of  Pro of life
of the proposals are
absolutely amended Indeed they are
requested and there is a mechanism for
building consensus that is,
I, well, in a month I could, eh,
after we'll talk about it, it's interesting, it's a
good question, after we'll talk about it, eh, in
For example, I  I'm going to propose a
security thing I have a
very small security proposal which is to
remove a certain constructor from a
couple of classes ok Obviously this
might not find everyone in agreement ok
And this thing obviously I already know
that I won't have  everyone agrees everyone is on the
same side I've already talked about it with other
people they've already
told me it's probably the right thing
but it's difficult to  make it accepted
Towards the beginning the proposal was to
remove some constructors now without
going into details remove some
constructors from a couple of classes Well I'm
curious what it means to
make some constructors disappear And
okay if you want I'll also tell you the proposal is
So the String strings in C are
presented by a pointer remove the
constructor that takes an integer Yes no
remove the constructor that takes a
pointer ah uh ok and only have the
construction when you also know the
length or in any case you have a maximum
length
So if not  you have that if you only have
the pointer at least ask to have a
specific tag that says this is a
Safe operation That is then make
sure that the developer knows that he
is doing a Safe operation
Why Why very often the fact that
this constructor  it's implicit it makes
you have a pointer Assign it to a
string and it becomes a string Assign it
to a String View and it becomes a String
View And Eh And this implicit does
n't even make you think about the fact that it's implicit
that
you may have a clear problem CH
Instead what we want to do is draw
attention to the fact that this
could be a  problem Then if you
want to make it write a little more
explain it to humans the
root problem is the fact that in c+ plus
there is the string determiner character
that should indicate end of
string and if someone mistakenly writes in the code it
assigns a  pointer to const char
or to char asterisk something but maybe
deleted somewhere else that doesn't find
a determiner character This
could obviously generate a problem
in construction and the fact that
it is implicit means that it is not an
explicit Constructor and therefore it
must not be  explicitly specified that
I am building a string from this
pointer but it can be an Automatic
conversion at a time you do not do it you do not
want to do it intentionally Exactly
explained for No no Anyway it does
not give the developer a way to
think about what he is doing in a
way  so for that
we would like to remove it we would like to put
instead a request to have this
tag that simply says problem
obviously that ved romati how much code
is SM backwards compatibility problem how much
code is smin So first of all it's not the
first time that things have been removed from the
language
so I'm getting  mind two examples
Pointer which was the
managed pointers version is removed there is no more aut aut PD
does not exist anymore it has been deprecated in c+
plus 11 and Solto in c+ plus 14 and another
feature and Bull Vector unfortunately
it is still there it has never been
deprecated instead  the other thing that is
Well Vector of Bull just to explain it
the problem but it is not so much the fact that
it is a Vector of Bull but how it is
specified which
is specified to allow the
compaction in bits of the Bulls and therefore
there is a  series of problems whereby the
Bull Vector is a strange beast
and and it is not like all the other
Vector Vector of whatever they are
made in one way the Bull Vector is
made in a completely
different way and and the other The other  instead what
comes to mind is Random shuffle which
was a function that
Rand used under ok Soto it was removed now
there is shuffle which uses the Random number
Generator of c+ El and so it is ok ok Safe
a whole series of of of things even
more Safe  from the point of view of
IT Security In the sense that
generates true random numbers and not
bad random numbers like Rand
Ok ok S I know guys Maybe I realize
that we are doing saying things maybe
not Base Base Base But in the meantime we are
tasting tasting something Then
maybe we will go back I will go back alone to
do something much lower level
or with the good Marco and so on but
I see there are people who are appreciating
appreciating Ok
then there are also there is the seventh
level The backwards compatibility No ehm
Mh is it really that much of a problem
That is if if you make a modification that breaks
the  existing code but it is but the Fix is
like this Straight
Forward there is no there is no possibility
to say guys ok Oh Compilers
can always have I don't know some gods
some compile directives that say use
backwards compatibility or not that is that in the
end the  ' compatibility is a bit of a tumor
that is FR in 50 years will surely make you lose
the simp Plus against yes
anyone of the little things In fact yes
yes no sorry sorry I didn't mean it No no
no this is the meaning Ado How
important is backwards compatibility until
point
Here I mean there are some problems with
backwards compatibility, that is, many
c+ Plus problems are not
c+ Plus problems but c+ Plus problems
because it maintains backward compatibility
with c apart from Brit int also c+ Plus x +
3 with c+ Plus X
Yes yes but the fact is that c+ Plus
also maintains backward compatibility  not
only of his 40 years 45 almost but also
of another 1015 of DC so
Ok
ok it's a bit of a problem So no Every now
and then the retroc ility has to be broken and
and even here it's not necessarily
wrong for example eh Recently
they left  I think in c+ plus 14 or 17 I
don't remember it was there is there is the
possibility to use comma operator that is
the comma operator ok ok to
overload the comma operator Eh I don't
remember exactly the order in which
they did things if they deprecated it
if they deprecated it only in some
in some moments But this was needed
because in one version they deprecated it
in the next version they
removed it in the next version They
introduced the possibility to put
multiple separate parameters instead  from
comma  in the square bracket operator
so now in c+ plus3 we can make
matrices with
square brackets Ok ok It was a path that
required three versions of c+ Plus to
get to Ok ok Okay the deprecated
is not removed deprecated is an
intermediate step ok So  there is a Warning if you
use it removed is the next time but
in fact my proposal is to
remove but it is not said that step 1
is we remove it maybe step 1 will be
as the comma operator works that is to
write a comma B has  a certain
meaning not only to separate the
parameters but also leave it outside
of that m
and the yes and
in any case yes there
are it is not said that this will be done
atomically in the first first
useful version of the
Standard maybe it will be done in
two versions in the  first it will be deprecated
in the second it will be removed or there is
another proposal which are the profiles and
Safety profiles and that could
also be another point where it is
inserted therefore inside a Safety
profile I don't know range
Safe that particular one  constructor
is turned off You can't use it
and it's difficult to control this thing
i.e.  appan
propost yes but it is a proposal that
Biarne himself is working on so
let's say it is well
followed
Ok yes Then we'll
talk about it If we get there today we'll
also talk about this stuff here safy Plus Plus
we'll get there we could get there
lots of interesting questions I'm
saving some then  we will talk So
who asked questions I don't do it 50
times if you want I'll explain a little bit
How is the committee composed Go go
So at a high level there are admin
Group director Group and AB review Group
admin and director are precisely the
most management part of  high level of the
committee almost at a political level
let's say and review Group is
a part of that question from before that
said But those who do the compilers
How do they keep up every 3 years
those who do the compilers are
part of the
committee absolutely and this AB
review Group in particular was
wanted by the
compiler implementers and is specifically concerned
with evaluating the proposals if the proposals
have an impact on
binary compatibility between different versions of the
Standard compiler so the new c+
26 library I can do it I can write it
so that it is binary backwards compatible
with that of c+ 23  So if I have a
part of the program that uses the library
that is compiled in
c+ platform dependent No that is the binary
is not Plat no binary I mean I mean
compiler parity that is I have my
compiler but a part of my
program is compiled with a standard and
with a library and the other part of the
program is compiled with another
standard with another with a
function call so if I bought they are
compatible Ok Exactly typically that
is exactly the case i.e. I bought the
library from third parties them  they gave me
the
compiled I want to pass the
next version of the
compiler if there was no this
binary compatibility it would be
impossible all modern compilers
have a form of binary compatibility
The last one to introduce it was Visual
studio standardized That is standard level I
establish the
binary no then it  standard does not
establish the The binary standard
That is, it does not establish that the binary
binary compatibility must be
maintained But this group is concerned with
understanding whether it is possible to maintain it ok
Ok ok And it tries to direct and
suggest to those who make
proposals solutions to maintain the for
ensure that
binary compatibility is maintained the standard
does not impose or guarantee
binary compatibility  that is, tomorrow
a proposal could be approved
that says that it breaks everything, that it breaks
binary compatibility, it has already
happened, it has happened in the past, that is, if El has
brought a substantial modification to the
strings, the strings before could do
Copy on WR which is a mechanism
whereby when  I assign a string I don't
do any operation and I refer
to the same memory but when I
go to modify it I create a new
string and it is a we can say
an optimization
c+ V said no to that optimism
and broke the compatibility and therefore  gcc
for example has a flag that tells you if
you want to use the new strings the
old strings Ok ok the SAP and it's still there it's
still there Because our project for
example has been using the old strings for years
now we are  migrating on the
new strings on a Major Release
so eh that is everything even with c+ 1 20
You can use the strings pr Plus Plus
Eleven ok Ok ok that's fine Then there are the
two main groups that deal
with the language so the syntax of
the syntactic part  and the equivalent
two other groups dealing with  of the
library part and they are called co
Working Group For Working Group the
main group and Evolution Working
Group and library Evolution Working Group
those who instead deal with
evolution Ok explain to us a little better the
difference between language and
standard libraries I imagine then the language  it's
the one that makes up the syntax of the
language so the part of I don't know
what How do you write a for loop How do you
write a template What are the
variable arguments rather than not
all the features that are
eh that are embedded in the language that
are part  of the core of the language the
library instead is something that is written
in c+ plus and is provided by all
standard compilers. However in reality
it is provided for a large part in
source code. So if you want you can go and
look at it. Usually they are very difficult
to read precisely because  the fact that
they have to be
maybe they have to
cover now are yes Plus Plus 11 14
17 20 and 23 five versions plus the0 three
six different versions of the language
and Ok many times they do black magic for for for
when there was when of the times
when I developed video games in
200720  there was there was and it wasn't so
readable anyway  S you could get
inside enough Microsoft Yes yes now
yes Microsoft was the inware that was
quite well written but it was
precisely her
Eh not
Now it is apart Microsoft has rewritten
everything eh And anyway it is very difficult to
read really its time was herbs the
lead  I don't know if he's still Microsoft or if
he's not there anymore but on the book No he
left Microsoft very recently
months ago but actually the penultimate meeting
was Microsoft and the last meeting was no
longer Microsoft for a  couple of
weeks so
eh he was he was left He was in charge of
Eh I think
No I don't know exactly what he was
in charge of in Microsoft but I know that the
standard library at the time was the one
developed Let's say it had been
acquired from outside and then they had
worked on it  internally at his time he was
Head of Visual studio at his time
so yes yes yes yes he has always been
tied to Visual studio but exactly
what he did I never
understood
ok he is also the Cher of Working
Group 21 Ok  the boss to
be is the prime minister while
biarne is the president of the
republic in short yes more or less  less
then behind this there are the
study Groups Ok which are instead Focus
are C they have a particular interest
in an aspect of the
library language or aspects that perhaps
mix language and library a
classic example is that of
linear algebra for which  to introduce the
matrices Which are MD span they are
called they had to do
language features and library features
So then just to have a list
Well now I'll write them all down so
we can talk about it So these are the ones
active at the
moment Ok but they are DC Plus Plus DC  Plus
Plus and the important one that I want to
talk about now above all would be
the study Group 23 which is the one on
safety and Security where
the proposal for Safe c+ was discussed Plus which is
the one that was then unleashed by
Let's say that this whole study Group which
is  the latest created is triggered by
that Bill of the CISA cise but also other
previous Bills that the United States in
particular have proposed. By the way I
can give you a little background on the
reason why
eh those Bills were written eh eh
Tell us a little  ' So the reason why
those Bills were written and it was
explained to me by a person who
deals with  Zig which is another language
eh It's a bit
like Rust is s+ Plus Like Zig is Ok it's
a bit more powerful but on that on
that level Zig I know I read something
about
eh Very interesting I liked it I
don't c  'I wrote a Liga of code I have to
admit it though talking to this
person and seeing Among other things in
my interview with him Unfortunately I did not
record it we did a live and
in the live there was also the author of the
main language in  in the
chat it was very interesting because
it made me understand a few things about the
language that I have to say I liked it
Dev I must have read an article sig it
reminds me of something very cool Zig Ok If
I had time Imp I would speak Zig but
unfortunately ok Why  It reminds me that maybe
he made a Reaction an article
of maybe the one who created it I don't
remember badly maybe Ok interesting
Anyway let's say that he was explaining it to me he
told me Zig is a is a Foundation and it was
created with
a Chapter  3 of an article 501 of the of
the American system to make the
Foundation while Rast Chapter 6
difference between the  two he told me Chapter
3 does
does the Foundation takes the money and
invests it to do its things Chapter 6 is
the same thing but it can
lobby it can
lobby lobbing you know lobbing at the the
American Parliament at Ok ok that's
fine at the  various entities and and
this he was saying the fact that
a certain number of Bills on security are coming out
is also due to the work of the
Rust Foundation with
the honestly I don't see anything
wrong with it on the contrary I mean in my opinion they are
working for what they believe in which is
the the  Rast security is a language
that was built for security
and obviously they are
proposing they are saying we have to go
in this direction it is safer to go
in this direction and they convince
politicians to go in this direction
Ok ok that's fine that's fine
Obviously in quotes it damages  yes and
s+ Plus but it damages them because they don't
have these features ok because
not having a whole history of
backwards compatibility they weren't born at a
time when there were also
simply theoretical things the theoretical basis
for this type of security was born
precisely
on on a Valley of a theoretical studies
on on safety on Memory  Safety
Ok ok and resource Safety in
general ok Among other
things I also add a speech that is
we said that c+ Plus has a
compatibility with c and for many years
there hasn't been but recently because
these Stud Groups were created in
numerical order  what
is called wg21 wg1 c+ Plus
Lon has been created I don't know how that
word is pronounced it's written like that ehm and and it's a
group that is dedicated to the
synchronization between C and c+ in fact
there was a question that I wanted to
take up again at this point  how do you synchronize development
eh just how do you synchronize us yes and and there
are people who are part of both
Working Groups and and for example they try to
make sure that the features proceed
in step stupid example and he is
introducing us Eh
the
Breaks with name Ok  now one exits from a
loop it breaks and breaks the first loop the
closest inner loop sure Eh
what they are introducing they are
introducing a feature that allows you
to name a for and then F the break on
that ok ok ok that is I call the  my
for Goofy Pluto Donald Duck and then  I say
break paperin the external one the
internal one Cer Exactly Ok so ok and this is
a feature that they are
working on both on C and on c+ Plus for the
future Ok ok but then there are also
more vertical things like machine
Learning or numerics that's it  which
deals with all the mathematical libraries
compile Time programming is the one that
deals with reflection now I
also thought about Goto But it has nothing to do with it It has nothing
to do with it Goto must die
badly it has been deprecated excluded or
technically still usable then the
Goto is  a disaster In the sense that it
still exists and is still there and in c+plus it creates
an unspeakable number of messes because it is
something that goes beyond all
structured programming of course
and makes it very very very difficult for you
to do what in c+plus is done
with the  exceptions that is the stack and
winding but also the destruction of
local objects you don't know how to do it anymore
because if a Go can jump in the
middle of you and the local object initialized
the local object initialized you don't
know anymore
you don't have that the2 is terrible we are  everyone
agrees but it's still part of the
crime. Eh unfortunately it is
difficult you never see eh
Well anyway we talked about
proposals how a
proposal works So a good idea let's write
the proposal let's write a good
proposal document which is a more or
less standardized document one makes
an introduction Explain why he wants to make
a certain change or introduce  a
new feature and then says how it will
implement it If it is a library or
says how it would work if it is a
language feature this usually goes to a
study Group That is, he put let's take
my proposal Let's remove this
constructor goes to study Group 23
because it is  the one that deals with safety
and Security Then if it goes
well We move on to the relevant Evolution Group
That is, if it is a
language feature to the Evolution Working Group
if it is a library feature to the library
Evolution Working Group in my case
it could be a hybrid between  the two one
of language because in any case a
library thing because in any case the impact
on the library is there However there could
also be something of language if it was a
particular syntax to say this it
turns off in this condition here now
without going into the technical but let's say
that  it could go to both
Evolution Groups if it was a mixed thing
and then it goes to the relevant core Group
so library Working Group or core
Working Group and finally it is voted
in the standard ok This is the
normal process it never happens it never happens
because Why when you get to the study
Group all the study Group or the evolution
Group there is always someone who says M
I don't
like it No I don't  you go back
but Change it a little and bring it back to us
So already here you see that you
can't do it in less than a year ok Because there are three
levels you usually go through a level at
each meeting Ok so in a year you go
from the proposal to the voted inside  the
standard however if you already start to do a few
of these loops already the time S
lengthens not only this does not have
within a week no this
happens No no No rarely So There
are exceptional cases in which a study
Group passes it by  example the Evolution
Group in the same week but
Let's say that the thing must be
prepared there must be an agreement there must
be a preliminary discussion in
which it is known that that ficur is important
it must pass at that moment
So it is very rare that this happens
during the same week of  usually you
go to the next meeting Sometimes you
go back a doubt arises a
question a specific one is discovered
and it is said  Ok Go back to the
previous step and discuss this
aspect again because in our opinion you
have not evaluated these aspects
it happens you go back to the previous point and
review it or
sometimes you go back to the previous point
but of the other Branch Why do you want
to have the opinion also  of the language if
the
library and
there are also other things it goes to the
trash sometimes obviously and sometimes it
ends up in the trash and in
exceptional cases it is voted out of the
standard or it is voted out and it goes
to the trash Ok and it happened  it happened
with the previous proposal for
contracts contracts that are
okay without having to explain how What
are contracts? They are basically
formally written conditions
for the execution of a function or
the use of an object ehm no idea
Pro Well they come from an
old language called
iella which was interesting because it
introduced this they are always They are
always part of Safety And it introduced
the fact that you have
preconditions to execute a method
of class invariants and things like that
The point is that the  proposal that was
made in c+ 17 had been voted on it was
within the standard Eh and yes they are  realized
that nobody wanted exactly that
proposal it was removed it was put in the
trash
and then How long does it take to make
a proposal we said a year and then
however each
interaction usually takes more than
Usually it makes you take more time
and some  sometimes even
groups are activated that are
incubators when there is a lot of work
on the evolution groups there are
pre-filters in between which therefore already make you
bring the minimum number of
steps that you have to do to four
and in the end a proposal
decent average proposal usually takes at least 4
years Wow ok And so when you start
making a proposal you have to already
accept that if it is of a
certain size the target is not the
next version of c+ Plus but at least
the one after  if not the one after that ok
ok ok Yes you can do the
speedrun Yes then but
Devid we did this one
then ok stead
optional stead optional is a class that
tells you if an object can be there
or not Ok it's simply a lo
you can see it as a container you can't
see it as something that can
be there or not Let's start from here
A Union between Void  and something Exactly
exactly and this is what it was up to
c+ plus
23 ok up to c+ c+ 23 it was this
within the discussions for c+ 26
we found ourselves faced with a Paper
that proposed a class that looked a
lot like this but
that  it was different and it was only used
to
say to represent a collection of
zero or one
elements Ok that's basically it
when when we saw it we
said to ourselves it's the same thing I mean me and
a couple of other people said but
this is the  same thing diad optional
So we made a counter proposal
to replace that magic class that
had which was a collection of 0 E1
elements with stead optional making
stead optional the existing stead
optional also a collection of 01
elements
Mh So we added a couple of
things  aad optional to make it
a
collection and eh we wrote it In
February 2024 and it was
approved So in the meantime we skipped
the Stud Group because the discussion had
already taken place within the Evolution
Working Group so we went
directly to talk to  the evolution
Working Group
Eh  the proposal was really a page
Ok I mean there were a couple of pages of
examples and then not even a page Half a page
of
proposal we went to discuss it
directly in March in Tokyo not me
eh we wrote the wording in April
passing it through the
conferences  calls that are now there every
now and then in between and so we arrived
with great fanfare directly to the Library
Working
Group in June so in 4 months we
had we were approved within the
standard within the standard that is it will be
in the next it will be in standard 26 of 26
but it is already  in the Working Wood Ah ok It's already
the Working draft and there has already been an
attempt to pull it out because there
was in
November no rightly in November they
realised that this could in
some cases change the meaning of
existing code Ok In particular  inside
Boost no the ability study
Exactly inside Boost there was a
thing
that checked if a certain class
I think it was serialization Jason
checked if a certain class was a
range and then checked if it was
optional  But since optional has
become range, the
serialization of range entered and not that of
optional, so this optional object
was  serialized as a range of
zero elements or a range of one element
which was usually not what was
wanted added two Boost brackets
somewhere pretty much Exactly And
so in the end they were essentially
merciless templates and ageless defines
exactly and that's what the Boost maintainer has
said In my opinion it's a bug We
answered In our opinion it's a Boost bug
exactly and good that we caught it right away
because someone could have versed a
similar class and it wouldn't have worked
so eh we have all the time to
boosta all the time to  fix the
problem before the release of yes 6
in the end it was what is Boost son in
my opinion quite historic library no Yes Among other
things it is Boost is a bit of an incubator
for all things and for all
libraries yes Plus  Plus 23 DC Plus Plus
new and it was for many things all
the various
shared Pointer was one of comes from
there mapp hash Map come from there So it's
a whole series of things that is it's a
very important library but
there is not that is there  some
standard serialization way in c+ plus that
is there was There was something R not yet
no
protocol  there is nothing of ser
standard implementation in c+ but many
things that are missing c+ Plus clear clear
ok Ok let's move on let's move on come on
ok another example Ah well let's do an
example the opposite example This is
always my proposal I mean I did it
examples with my proposals I remember
that it was yours this one here cip more
differentiable was a firing missiles
on Mars No but not even because there elon
musk he could also do it firing
missiles on Alpha Centauri directly and
in fact we made two presentations
then we realized  I realize that it wasn't
eh it wasn't feasible it wasn't it wasn't
interesting for the committee ok The
committee considers it a niche thing
and it's difficult to make them change their mind Ok
so okay written In 2020 rewritten
in 2021 investigated for a couple of years
then directly in  basket
Ok so c+ Plus the standards are
written and then there are problems and
there is a mechanism to handle the
problems too now I don't want to discuss
this too much because then maybe
we'll go on and on about What is too
tech too technical right  to make it
clear there are processes for
handle the problems if they are already in the
existing standard you can decide whether to
fix in a new version or whether to fix
in the version retroactively i.e.
say c+ 17 there is an amendment to c+ 17
that says no this thing here must be
interpreted in this way or
to say  c+ Plus 17 is what it is but
26 will have the Fix for that problem
m Okay an example defect report What
do the National Bodies do What do the
National Bodies do we discuss the proposals we
create them and approve the
final standard document ok and we participate in the
votes That is  are there quotas for
nations like the UN or is there a vote
for each nation a vote for each nation like this at
random burmini
America S So
there were OT eight famous people in higher education
So it has changed
again recently
about America I don't know  more as it is
honestly I know that apart from America
take away America the other
main nations have a vote but there are
different statuses that are valid in
some votes in others not that is for the
vote of the final Standard they are valid
for the vote of the intermediate instead
it's a vote per nation i.e. Ok but in
many  voting there are just a show of
hands and everyone votes so it's a
huge mess no in the sense it is and it's not it
's not done completely haphazardly
however there is a coordination
of the National Body In the sense that
Italy presents itself  with all that is there is
some Yes Italy presents itself through
Uni which is the
Italian standardization committee in
particular there is a hierarchy like
that of Iso that we have
seen I just discovered that Uni is the
Italian ISO Ok I don't know  what it is okay I don't
even want it and no And then there's Unino which is
the computer science part and then there's the
part that deals with languages
where there are also other people who deal
with other languages ​​We have
set up  an association
to represent c+ Plus Ok it's not
the only way i.e. you don't have to
be part of our association
to represent c+ Plus for Italy
but in
fact everyone who represents
Italian c+ Plus at least as far as I know
up to the  last time we were all
members of the ace all members
of the association ok So for better or for worse
sits let's say de
facto the association that
ration Yes the association By the way it's
called group 21 in Italian
and ok Well we as an association
are organised with
monthly meetings in which we discuss ideas
we also have meetings during the
operations of the week
typically on Friday evening before the
plenary session in  in which in the plenary they
actually vote, that is, there is a formal vote on
things, during the week
informal votes are taken in which in
particular the Core groups decide what
will go into the standard and on Saturday morning it
is simply a form of
deciding this thing goes into  the
standard Yes no is usually
a plebiscite of yes That is, in fact, one votes and
asks if there is anyone opposed to the
unanimous consensus Ok Ah I doubt that you
are these people, right, I doubt that you are the
consultants of the CR No, we are not these
people No, we are not  Cred consultants no
association It's an association it's not a
company ok
because second No but we don't even have
a website No there isn't even a website ok No
it's a it's a choice in reality we don't we don't
do let's say I was about to answer
the question How  you enter if someone
wants to contact
or So how do you enter Okay you can
you can contact  Usually, however,
we try to have people who have
some experience with the language and
with the standardization process,
that is, who have already informed themselves about How
is a proposal How does it work You
can work It is not necessary to
be part of the committee to make a proposal
Ok this  it is an important thing to make
a proposal you can write a
proposal exactly in the same
format send it to the
committee mailing it is advisable to have a
Champion and the association also does
this for those who are Italian
obviously the association takes
charge of the
proposals that for  which needs Union for
which needs someone to represent it Eh it
doesn't happen that often but I mean up to now it has
n't happened but if there are
your own it could happen And then from there it's
easy for you to not be
contactable because you don't have online
who wants to write  to Marco and has more
information Yes it's easy
and so okay let's do this We
also have an internal mailing list But precisely
Eh the thing that I would like to see do in the
future that is not written here is
to organize a meeting in
Italy but it's a bit  ' complicated because
in Italy it is difficult there are no large
companies that use zon c+
Plus that are interested in
sponsoring a  meeting That is, in other
countries like Prague there is a big
vmware development site and they organize the one in
Poland
it was organized by Nokia even though
Nokia is not Polish but it has a big site
there and
so in America there are various various
entities that organize
unfortunately in Italy we do not have this
forum ok and it is interested in
standardization More than anything else and so
Well absurdly when I was in
Milestone in gaming we were there were
good people and maybe we often
also talked about the Standard of the
language  It may be that for a we were the
ones who used c+ Plus the most in
Italy after the military it may be however
eh It is strange that the military world does
not not touch the defense does not have its say
on these things but I don't know
the most regulated world now is
the  'aerospace
are the most regulated but they are also the
ones who are least interested
in the evolution of the
language because they usually
focus on making an
old version of the language Safe something
community of Plus Plus it Marco Arena the
founder of the community  and that
we were talking about before
and yes I helped Marco
organize events in Italy and
Arena for many years  it's part of group 21 so yes
we are always the same the same the
same people many times there are other
people who are in Plus Plus it who
are not in the committee and people who are in the
committee who are not in Plus Plus it
Sorry I didn't see  that question instead
no no it is said Italy there are no large
companies that use c+ plus there are those who say
in Italy there are no large companies
point could
[Laughter]
finish
Ok ok fine Eh no here we are talking about of of of of of
a proposal  but no I wouldn't
go and it's the proposal
we were talking about before but we've already
discussed it enough
Ok ok fine Eh but let's talk about safety
no then we'll go straight to you Desa on
Safety Eh the slides are finished or did
you want yes yes yes yes I am  OK I'm
OK Ok what's the problem that is why
c+ plus is not
Safe then why is it not Safe because for
compatibility with C
mainly the causes seen from outside
No what's the problem I write in c+
plus what problems can I create then
what is the problem The problem is
that I can for example read an
arbitrary area of
memory and I can
do it intentionally accidentally
or provoked mh mh ok that is you
imagine having a program in which
you have in a certain area of ​​memory the
login and in the next area the
password and imagine having a way to
eh print out the login and the password
that is
behind it that is  make sure that the
login does not end and writes the
password that is behind it This can
be something that is triggered by
particular actions of those who are
interacting with your system and
compromises the security of the
system because your language does not
it allows you to prevent this this
action ok or the way you are
using the language to be
language if one wants one can write
super Safe code if one wants but the
problem is that if one wants but is
careless one could have these
vulnerabilities inside  what he
writes if the language instead
prevents you from doing certain things
that maybe sometimes are
exactly what you want to do but
most of the time are not
what you want to do
and instead to do those things it makes you take
a slightly longer road unsafe
that
language is considered safer than the
language that instead makes you do it
by alluding to Rust but also by alluding to C
sharp eh not not or Python That is  in Rust and
Python you don't get access to any
memory area C sharp and Python Well
anyway C sharp for example has a
mechanism where you can do dirty things
with pointers
eh There are some unsafe spaces you
open
a a a a unsafe scope  and inside you
put all the crap you want of pointers
but outside you can't do it you can do
party in assembly directly if you want
in s+ you can do Yes okay but many times
you don't need to do crap
so the advantage is that the
languages ​​in which  the
unsafe part is explicit they are also easier to
do privacy reviews for example
no as in saying yes Eh but looking very
carefully outside I can be calm that
certain types of
problems let's say there are two things On the
one hand you have many more tools for the
formal verification which among other things are integrated
into the language i.e. the language
simply prevents you from You are
super croaking Marco what is wrong with
the audio I don't know I don't know if
headphone batteries or something No no I'm
connected to the cable I
hear a  a Static listen Ah maybe it's
my speakers maybe problems I don't know ok
sorry It could be that they are  I have the
problem I put on the
headphones let's see
let's try it crackles like [ __ ] still ok
No I don't think so maybe So it was my
problem Ok
ok And what were we saying eh c+ Plus
so Actually yes formal tools in in
c+ plus you don't have in  c+ plus there is another
thing that works against it and that we are
working on which are what are
called undefined behaviors.
Yes, undefined behaviors are
good things because they are
opportunities for optimization but
they are ugly beasts because they don't
there are assumptions that
are made. For example, the
fact that integers do not start from
zero. Not only is it worse if you increment a
number with the
sign, the compiler assumes that it
can never become less than the
value while in those I
deliver is
that  at some point the
unsigned ones return to zero Sorry the
signed ones could go on forever for
all the compiler and the
compiler know So if you make a loop
that keeps incrementing a number and
then checks if the value is less than
a di  a threshold that was before the
compiler can
safely say this will not happen
never but if there are variables the
compiler Can't know it no Camo only
if it sees No the compiler No the
compiler knows it if for example you
Initialize it to 5inque Then you check if it's
less than zero Ok constant and you
just continue to increment it and no you continue to
increment it  but you check you are less than
Zero The compiler can assume that
that condition will never be True
even if in practice we know
that then the integers go up and then
return to a very large negative number
but the compiler is allowed to
assume that that is not  it ever happens ok
and and
unfortunately this can
do can create really
bad and
unpredictable things same thing The compiler
can assume that you never read and write
out of memory but if you do it
is not defined what
Ok m so eh And usually
things happen  ugly there as we saw before
so the aim is to define all the
undefined behaviors sometimes the existence
of undefined behavior is also convenient No
that is in the sense that Yes because it is what
allows you to do optimization
that is the fact that the content of a
variable to initialization is not known
of a let's say  of an unknown integer
means that every variable volume
must not be equal to zero or chaos and of the
kind must not do an extra action Yes
yes and that is one of the things that is in fact about
to change ok And however if you think about it
this is also due to the  the fact is that
when c+ Plus was born there was a
computing power that was a fraction of
what we have now yes clear but it's a
shame an analysis of the flow of a
variable inside a function
at the time was expensive so trying to
understanding if that variable was then
initialized in all the Branches of
your code was a mess. Now these are
things that a compiler does
easily. So in reality you don't
go to initialize the variable if on the
first use you already know which branch
they
initialized it and therefore  we can
afford to say No now
I initialize everything
m everything that is not
initialized after
So in reality what you are going to
initialize is only a fraction of
what you would have initialized 40 years
ago Ok So the reason that there was 40 years
ago for not initializing  the variables is
a little bit decayed it is a lot reduced
m So there are some things
that are Legacy
that we can
safely stop of of of of
considering f behavior and define very
well define clearly but they are not the
only sources of problems No
they are not the only sources of problems but a
good part are those a good part are
define behavior in reality if you go and
look a lot  often the source
problems are very close to the undf
Well or they are Pointer algebra or in
any case cast of pointers from one thing
to another and then after there are damn what
I want Yes
yes it is very it is very well defined as
behavior No actually No actually
most of the time people believe that it is
the fine behavior it
is not for example you have a thing that
is done very famous quake code
How to do the inverse square root that
is
attributed What is the name Romero No
kmac the code
yes yes no but  the code in particular
of the inverse square root is
attributed to kac Ok and what
did it do it took a
Float it treated it as if it were an
integer and did some operations with the
bits to make a first estimate
approximate Yes yes yes and then it brought it back
to Flo and did  two iterations of
Newton
fantastic excellent er F has always
been undefine behavior by the way it
is not even of of of  karmac but it is dated
GL code of saying that the the the
boorish C cast from integer fleet is undf
behavior only because the Size are not
necessarily equal from Flow and int No
no no no also because the Size are even
if the Size are the same  and andf
behavior you can only cast from for there
are a whole series of slightly
complicated rules so much so that in c+ 1720 I don't
remember if 17 or 20 bitc was introduced
which does exactly that at this
point I want to break the rules a bit  [ __ ] in the
sense that the Float standard is standard
The
integer sign unsigned standard is
now de facto standard or standard if you
go to reinterpret a sequence of bits
in a protocol And in another it is defined
No then no Then first of all the
fact that  integers are represented
in two's complement maybe it's
standard now ok Maybe it's standard in c+
23 In the sense that it wasn't standard but
however all the compilers in the universe
did it obviously obviously in reality it
wasn't up to a few standards ago it
wasn't  not even defined that the char
was 8 bit clear  clear and so char
could have been 9 bits could have been 11
and a half bits Ah wait no stop stop stop
8 bits That is in the sense that it was not
defined to be 9 bits okay yes it has never been
seen There are platforms that had
7 bit and 9 bit chars  but seven I understand
the first the aschi code is 7 bit Before
no yes no there were also 9
bit and well there were also 36 bit I mean
there were compilers that had
multiple compilers of Ello can't
do it however
when that is
from  'goose standard 754 most of the time
but the
language standard I think defines it not
so much that Float is must be 3754
so study these things guys I'm
Bell I I enjoyed with the standards I have
a fantastic stuff take go and
read the individual bits  of the exponent
mantissa
yes yes no they are they are very
interesting these things here the part
of the What is it called I
forgot the things when you go
Under go
inato the denoral the part Den
normalized Ok
there but I creak Ok So the
main problem if one defined
almost all undefine behaviors it
would be fine it would have a
shitty compiler and it would be fine because it's
shitty because it doesn't optimize
anywhere ok So essentially they are born
There is a bit of friction
there is a bit  of tension there that is the fact
is that if you remove all the undefine
behaviors you can no longer optimize the
code but for example one thing that
we discussed right inside
the Group 23 stadium last time
is removing
the time Travel in the F behaviors ok  that
is, I'll explain to you What is it now in the
current standards there is a feature whereby
if your code contains undefined
behavior let's say You have 100 lines of
code ok The last 20 lines of code
contain undefined
behavior that undefined behavior can
have an effect  before being
executed wait because the compat can
do qu solvable at compile time the
undefined behaviors not necessarily
No not necessarily but they can
have repercussions not not
solvable they can have
repercussions i.e. I know that you are
referring to a pointer I know that in the
middle that  pointer does not come  assigned
So at the beginning of the function I can
assume that pointer is not
Null because as a referential a
Null pointer is define behavior so
I can assume that it is not Null and and
this is a problem because before you
get to the point where there would be
strange behavior you  you have a
behavior that is totally wrong
now
Mh recently it was defined
that there are conditions for which no
that this thing cannot happen i.e. you
have to get to the point of executing
the instruction that continues define behavior
to have a visible change
outside the  PR behavior
on exceptions I don't solve C in the sense
that n Pointer exception things like that
are not
standard are not standard but the fact
that you de reference a Null pointer
does not generate an exception is
simply undefine behavior in the
language Ok
ok It's a un alt  an Exit Something yes That is,
you are doing check if the pointer is
null before
referencing an exception, you can
do that but you can't, the compiler for you
hasn't assumed that it doesn't do the check and
throws the exception if it is Null,
it isn't  in Java where you have a null
reference exception I think or something
like that  There are those who say they are studying the
book Secure coding in CN c+ Plus by
Robert cord do you know I don't know no I don't
know Ok I've never heard of
anyone but it's interesting maybe they
'll take a look at it Ok what kind of
So I imagine it's a very topic  hot
in c+ Plus no Yes it's a very hot topic
because this that The one you
talked about is not the first Bill that comes
out it's been about 3 years that
Bills come out every now and then that
say we must use Memory
Safe languages ​​we must
use we must use we must use  you
have to use Ok I see that we have safc
Plus Plus Exactly This is a P document
of the type of those that are proposal of c+
Plus proposal number of proposal r r0
stands for final eh revision revision Zer
this here is the first version of this
document which is  this document was presented it
is from September 2024 and it was
discussed I don't remember it is November I don't
remember when it was eh I can also
go and see it but it was discussed in the
last eh in the last meeting and
which by the way was
in
rozl in in
Poland Well, it was, it was discussed
and it is  an interesting proposal
Practically this proposal is very long
eh other than there is a lot of stuff this
proposal So this proposal is
wonderful In my opinion because what it
says is let's take the borrow Checker
and put it into c+ Plus but it's not
just this
it's a it
's written  from Sean Baxter who is a
person who
has implemented this thing already a
c+ plus compiler called
Circle
implements What do you think about Circle c+
Plus compiler
this one sexter is the author of Circle and he
has implemented Rust's borrow Checker
inside c+
Plus you can explain for the laymen I admit
that a couple of years ago I was on the
ball on Rast
now then I don't want to go into
too much detail because in any case
we are going into a territory that I don't
know perfectly well either I have a very
intuitive idea of ​​how it works  the
Rust Checker because
I made some Toy examples I have never
written production code in Rust
so I don't feel like saying but what
I saw in Rust was that it was a bit like
what we were saying before That is, it makes your
life  complicated to do
wrong things life is a bit complicated in
general Attention It is not always  it
's not an easy language to write
but let's say that its complexity
is there for the greater good I say to be a hot
Take I'll recycle this one Ok ok I'm the
narrative more I heard it is at the beginning yes
it's tiring but then once a
time that you start it flows and it will seem
ridiculous to you to think of languages ​​like c+
Plus This is that But in fact I don't
want I don't want to put myself in a
situation where I say
no impossible to develop Inas Plus but
it's true Welcome back Guido good
I went Ok ok no interesting but  there are
so many things
that ok It would be from
the now
nothing no so the idea is Rust has a
small problem has a
model in general very different from c+
Plus so it is difficult to take
integrate Rust and c+ Plus together a little
because there is  the model of the borrow
Checker that does not clash with the
rest of the thing but even if you want to
make an application that has a
secure part in Rust a part eh maybe the
calculation part in c+ plus it's a mess
because Why  c+ Plus code can do
crap and it can do crap even
inside Rast because  they share
the same memory space m so it's
hard to say now I take this
c+ Plus code that I had and I turn it
into a secure application by adding
a Rust frontend to it you can't So what
you have to do is take the Plus
Plus code and translate it into Rust and
that's it  which is a disaster you are
writing Rust code Exactly the idea
instead of S c+ Plus is fine but if we
have a mix of code that can be
recycled why don't we use the same
syntax as c+ Plus i.e. all that
code that doesn't access  of memory
we can reuse it word for word even
in a Safe environment it is already Safe code But
we do not mark it Safe and nobody knows
that it is Safe and we do not have in C+Plus at the
moment a mechanism to differentiate
what is Safe from what is not
Safe m  this document says why don't we
start marking what is Safe
as Safe and use and define a
new subset of the language that is
always
Safe Ok the one that uses the bor
Checker Ok There is an example let's see a little
feature on Safety Safe and the  compiler
can i.e. must do enforcement this
here is not Safe must not Compile
enforcement  and everything that is
used Inter inside this thing
do Ess is not better is not better to do
unsafe when it is not no
backwards compatibility it would be much more
convenient if if 95% of the code is Safe it is
a pain in the ass to go and indicate
Safe
eh but it's like now c+ Plus that is the
problem is that
Mh In my opinion then this proposal
Take it as an idea not like this
is the solution it could also be to
do the opposite but in c+ plus There
was also a proposal some time ago between
the  'another one by Vittorio Romeo that I don't know if
you know but he is a person who
worked for years in Bloomberg and
who was also a
member of the
committee of our Italian National Body until last year. He
left this year for
personal reasons and
eh and he had proposed a very
nice thing which were the what he
called the epox that is Ok the possibility
of making the language evolve
eh
specifying a new era of the
language for example We now
have every time we want to deal
with something that  must be
const we have to specify the
keyword const sure ok he proposed
as an example of application of
these  epoc in the future
default the default should be const
And you should only specify mutable
on things you want to change rather
than the other way around Why Why with with by
default It's a much
safer approach eh Oh God Yes yes definitely safer
Yes but also more of a pain in the ass
variables are almost always variables you
hardly want them always that is it is true
that in the last period I write many
many more Yes variables are almost never
variables they are variables that
are not reassigned very often and
then having them by default to const
would not be a problem and  writing every
now and then would give much more clarity the
function parameters yes the
function parameters Well but that is already a
strange thing because the function parameters
this is perhaps not known to everyone but if
you make a declaration with the
function parameters not const and  a definition
with the const parameters Matano are the
same thing Yes yes so there is already a
grey area there
where the meaning is to specify when it is Safe
Something yes and so on but not only but not
only you in the whole Safe area  you
can't use pointers
if you see there is no pointer you can't use
pointers
ok And then  if you see There is that
Mut keyword where you declare to modify the
vector Ok but in reality
Eh This is an example of There are already
const member functions that do not
modify the state of the object but
this is still different Here we are
talking about  of the borrow Checker In fact
this is not a situation where
things work but it is a situation
where things do not work Mh because you
are in this at this point iterating
in the vector and modifying the vector
at the same time which is something that in
c+  plus you can do and it is guaranteed not to
work That is this would be
broken code in c+ plus if you if you
wrote it in s+ normal CL it would already be
eight because you are pulling up a
collection so I know I know because you are
moving literat But in reality
it could be
reallocated  prevents you from doing it even though
there would be a case where this
would work Ok how does it How does it
understand that is, it understands that here you are
modifying the vector via borrow
Checker ok and it is the magic of how
borrow Checker works that
I don't even dare to start
explain why Ok I have a very
intuitive idea out here we are iterating
inside  a vector this
here there is an interaction only that the
pushbacks inside the vector could
reallocate and therefore the Tore iteration is
invalidated because it is not that every time
for efficiency the c+ plus simply
increments of Size off element
inside goes to the next element  But if there
was a reallocation of the vector the
next element is undefined behavior
exactly it is undefined behavior but there is
a case where this could
make sense while remaining undefined
behavior because it remains undefined
behavior if you had a reserve  on the
vector that guarantees you that Ok example
in this case you had You have a reserve
six elements you know that at most you do
not pushback the other three elements
which in reality are two in this
case or one cho solenti but you are
asking a lot compiler Eh  you're
asking the compiler to do a
lot of calculations a lot of things exactly and
That would be a damn mess and
instead this one does it simply by
preventing you from doing this
thing in the first place and what I was saying prevents you from
doing a lot of things that would be Safe even
if in  c+ plus you might think of doing
something similar that works he
prevents you you know terms and conditions The
memory Safety Ok interesting category
lifetime Safety is interesting obviously it
is a very long proposal and I imagine it
will be discussed
this according to you before we enter
obviously Wow how much stuff Mamma mia what
Lone So here
here I what I say here is here is one
of the problems of the of the  work of the committee,
that is, let's say that here when
the proposal was discussed In my opinion
the discussion was not managed very well.
In the meantime it was very much focused on the
fact that Sean Bexter did this thing here
with with in a
completely independent manner eh with in
reality  with a minimum funding from
an association that deals with c+ Plus
But minimum Mh and Eh finds himself Eh Nella
in the position however of saying gentlemen I
have a family eh that is I have to earn money
and I can't do these jobs on the fly and
hope that then one day  also because
this is a Madonna's work I don't know
how many pages I work for months a year but
he
all Wow ok he has already implemented it I mean
it's not a proposal out of thin air No
no it's clear it's clear he implemented it
I mean not at the level of  library
That is, he is really no no and the library
because since  the standard c+
Plus library is all built on pointers to
all the current c+ Plus features
especially unsafe
Let's say that the safety of c+ Plus
comes from the proio library but the
library is written with unsafe features and
gives you some constructs of some
abstractions  Safe to write code on
Safe i.e. Unique Pointer guarantees
that the memory management is done
correctly and there are no links but
it is built on the basis of pointers
Since this proposal to work
must eliminate the pointers
and he found himself in the situation of
having to also rewrite a
standard library In fact if you look at his
examples No it does not include eh
Standard Header Oh my god standard namespace but
uses a namespace called
std2 Oh a library that he wrote himself ok Well
but with angle brackets he made us
fall for it there  he noticed Exactly And
then he also has he also has std2 as a
namespace Yes yes yes yes
So he had to rewrite the
language and rewrite the library Wow
Wow ok and re-understand the whole library
to make it work in a Safe way
so here it doesn't  been to Nam Space  to
show you what's different what what's
there Yes qu di2 String View exists String
View in the language but it can't be the
same because one uses pointers
that other No clear clear If I had
only seen box St let's say box String
View  I would have I would have imagined that
box is a new construct but this here
was the old construct Instead no it is
the revised version Exactly exactly Ok Exactly
Wow and Well this person who did
this great job that enters the standard
I mean he has no economic problems I mean
let's do  a little goal guys important
In the sense that there are those who write
[ __ ] protocols on blockchain billions I am
written this is implementing this
stuff here it doesn't make money I don't want to
regardless of the No in the sense that
it was said I need to of of to
work that is  I can't do this full
time anymore and the other problem is that
within the discussion
the proposal for the profiles
of Sturrup and Sater has been put in opposition a bit because they are the two
who are proposing the profiles for
the Safety
against this proposal I find another proposal,
that is, I find it here on the are a
series of  no it's something that is much more
mature from the Standard point of view
so it's a series of
documents Ok that work on Safety
actually I was discussing it in that in that
thing before let's also take
SL back Yes I can I can share it again I
understood the the the  the political situation is the
following: there are the bosses of c+ Plus
who are carrying on their
speech on Safety which however is a bit
bureaucratic with
many implications, it will be seen in c+
plus
45 while this here is a production
already nicely packaged and
ready to be
implemented, however  from
a bit of a revolutionary who has gone crazy
I understood
therefore contrary Ok ok then no it is
exactly the opposite and it is
counterintuitive as What do we say that the
dstr and suter profiles have been working on it
for at least 2
years both
and have worked within the
committee  and they arrived with
proposals that built
a certain level of approval within the committee,
ok, this proposal was
developed completely independently by a
single person who did not participate in the
committee meetings and arrived with
a very large proposal that was done and finished
but he has no history within the
Ok committee  of which nobody knew anything
so it's a bit paradoxical. However, this
proposal, despite having an
implementation background of this
person, has never been seen and has never
been discussed by other
compiler implementers. It's a bit like what I was saying,
he was the one who has  I was upset
about a proposal but it came at
the last moment when things
can happen and it was proposed.
As you want this or this, we want to
prefer one or the other and honestly
I found myself in the position of
saying but what do I do?
I would like C I also wrote a blog
about it eh so what would I like and I
said to myself but I want
both of them because at this point the proposal
that already exists by Dier and
Sturrup is there and it is very advanced and  in
line to arrive to arrive in
Plus 26 Ah so 26 so then I can
we are already ready that one can arrive
and so why should we prefer a
proposal that arrives now and overturns
what we already have because because
there is a bit of practice c  'has experience
here is the s
Working exactly but that has
an implementation done and  then we have to
ask everyone to implement
the same thing maybe in their
compilers but I imagine that it
is also feasible to try to
compile existing code in
industrial quantities with this compiler no no no
no because this is a new
language if you can't use  pointers
don't compile anything Oh Obviously
Obviously C plus So no it doesn't make much
sense there is no code already written
so all the code that has been
written has been written byan Baxter and
some friend of his let's say it has
been written to the people who have  that
they use Circle that that however
there is not a large There is a large use
on the other side we have the strong
language No it's
[ __ ] I don't think I don't think that
we risk the spk of the language of course
Rust is a complicated solution for for
the  problem because it is completely
incompatible there are some
things that have They go a bit in this
direction Google has written its own
language compatible with c+ Plus but
different which is called
Carbon and is working on it herb suter
also has another thing has what he
call new c+ Plus syntax cpp2
or m and it has a front end too  D
c+
Plus Carbon
exactly
and CP front exactly is the proposal
of suter and it is called CPP front because the
original compiler of c+ plus was
called C front because it was a DC front end
and the compiler of Sat is a
D c+ front end  Plus that is a
transpiler that writes c+ code
Plus legendary SS the same photo as when
I remember it but this one here is like
100 years
ago Yes but I can't tell you you're so
different It doesn't seem so different to me Ok
ok I'll put this photo like  about the
books about the books that I don't have anymore someone
stole them from me Ah Who knows who it
was Ok Ah interesting
interesting there are those who ask us but seen
like this it seems like Rust installed on c+
Plus at the end of the day this wouldn't
demonstrate the Royal  need to
switch to Rust directly then Yes
and no in the sense the problem with Rust is that
it was Imp was
written it is certainly interesting but
a syntax that is
eh A bit strange for those who are used to c+
plus So if this problem Duo
I'm the provocateur that this
proposal says no no  Sure but what
this system says but
many know Ja c+ Plus Java a
syntax SIM c+ Plus Sharp a syntax
SIM c+
Plus having Rust with the power of C i.e.
with with also with the template mechanism
c+ Rust does not have the mechanism of  template
c+ Plus has another mechanism
generics in Rust was the nightmare I remember
yes eh It has its own mechanism for those who are
experts in c+ Plus the templates of D c+
Plus are obscure but they are
still Anyway let's say more Fam
not even the  overloading there was it seems not
even the over loading there are a
series of features that however are
sugars sinta in the end why the
overloading yes okay Let's say it
helps you but it's not it's not that you die If you don't
have it
though people who  she is used to
using it She likes to keep those
features
so this this proposal of Plus
let's say
merge would allow those who already have
experience in c+ plus to continue to
honestly for me this was one
of the Blocks to learning Rust and
it is also for  learn Zig eh that is the
fact that anyway not not Well  laziness
sure but
eh So laziness Eh I talk about
laziness when one has time
in the sense In my opinion it makes sense to talk about
laziness When one says ok I'm
studying I learned Java I don't want to
learn scala ehm so I'm lazy Ok
when one is working full time on  a
project that has to be carried forward has to
make new versions of that project
etc.
stop everything learn scale and
rewrite everything in scale is a bit of a
mess it's something that few companies
can afford to do sure
Exactly yes exactly and in fact it's my
problem  my personal problem with
Zig and Rust is to say
ok I accept to put myself even if it
was my time to put myself in the evening
and be a complete imbecile
because I don't know the syntax because I
don't know the library because I'm not
familiar with some concepts or
I do my [ __ ] in c+
plus where I have a certain experience and a
different productivity I have two criticisms of
this approach Of course not you but the
world ahead new programmers are churned out
every year why
should things before that second
criticism now with her the syntax
let's say a little  ' you can do it This is a
swear word eh The syntax will take
care of it a bit the logic you write what do
you care about the syntax
Well the syntax but it's not just the
syntax it's the some concepts
that are a bit alien i.e. the
generics seen in  a
completely different way than those
that in c+ plus the library conceived
in a completely different way
are a whole series of things that
slow you down and it's difficult especially
when you've reached a certain level of
a language it's difficult to say Ok now
I'll get back to it  to proceed this life with prog
20 years ago Ah it's difficult for you though if
as if c+ Plus 100% of the doc never like
Python that c+ Plus for which absolutely
But in fact I say laziness It applies to
those who are learning now and say I spent
the  my 6 months
learning c+ Plus I don't want to
spend another six learning Rust is
laziness I spent 20 years learning
plus in my case it's 30 now
and I'm going to forget Rust That is, I'll
go back maybe not 30 years because
some concepts  I have them for 20 years
and I'm going back to the speed I had in
2005 to program in c+ plus. I don't know if
I want to, that is, and this is an
interesting question for those who are approaching c+
plusia. The most recent standard
also includes the previous ones.  eh eh no then
this question is wonderful and allows for
a good discussion and it is an experiment
that I did in 2014 in
2015 in 2015 I then premise I
taught programming at the Polytechnic for years
and as a teacher in the
laboratory
and I always realized  I realize that
students had a hard time
learning C, that is, they were taught C+
Plus Ok formally, but they were
taught starting from C
Ok, therefore starting from pointers,
functions and then building classes on top,
etc. etc. etc. With
the advent of C+ Eleven and strong  in
particular at the time I said but
in my opinion it is easier to teach c+
Plus on the contrary starting from the new
features and then going to see the
old ones because the new ones are a
high level abstraction safer
easier to use more  hard to
make a mistake etc.
Then you can tell it Ok inside the
Smart pointer that you see that it allocates you and
allocates you by itself there is this thing here there is
manual memory management then
you can allocate and allocate But all the
complication of how it works
manual memory management you see it later
before you start using it you get to be
productive first less frustrated and then you
build it Start opening the box and
say how it works inside interesting it's
a different approach and what I
saw is that I did  a course in a
Maker
Space open to the public with people who
had done it and hadn't, that is, had already
programmed, hadn't programmed,
programmed in other languages ​​or had
already programmed C+ Plus
and let's say at the end Eh at least some
had got to a point  where
they made a small project
and then among other things they voluntarily
went into more detail on some parts that
were not planned because the part of
getting to the pointers for example the
manual management of memory was not
planned they went into more detail
why not the tools  No because it was
interesting not to do it, that is, to
allow you to be productive in c+
plus 14  without having the basics of C
and it can be done ok I admit that I
instinctively do not agree also
because I have always worked in
very embedded environments no video games where
you want V I have rewritten Memory
allocator That is you want and you must have the
underlying control but to write
other types of applications I imagine that it is
not not not not not not not not not but I must
admit that against what I
just said the book that in the end
enlightened me the most In reality I read
all almost up to 15 years ago I read
all the books it seems eh and the one that
seemed to me the most the book that I would
recommend to anyone to learn
c+ plus Axel reded c+ Plus by Andrew
kenig and Barbara mo and essentially
it worked a bit like you say it started
from c+ Plus and then like  in chapter 30 ago
Ah then By The Way If you want you can use
these features of C and I remember that it was
enlightening that I said Here
maybe if I had to recommend
a book to someone I would recommend that one because it makes
you see C+ plus without C  and then
it gets to the end There but but my
instinct tells me that that is no damn he has in his
hand I'm giving you the most
powerful tool in the world I want you to know
how how What is
a but char
asterisk const asterisk const
asterisk const that is you have to understand the
difference both to the n ways of
positioning  the const in the
level pointers you have to know it you have to
understand it the purpose Yes the purpose I had
given myself was to explain
the pointer as late as possible
and it worked that is also because it was one
of those things that I had seen
teaching maybe to
aeronautics students who
did not  they had the interest in
learning C because it was the course
of their
subsequent career but for them the
programming language was a tool
for their
frustration so I said well maybe
yes  it can proceed differently but
I'm not the only one who thought so
now anyway there is
a group within the committee that deals
only
with teaching how teachable
are the features that we are adding
to the language Ok nice interesting how
for for for  explain a little bit How
c+ Plus works and how you study how I would
propose it  to
study I would not recommend starting
from c+ Plus 23 or at least Yes but not with
all the features of the language I
would recommend the
language features of c+ Plus 20 and the
c+ Plus library t
Eh because the features that have been
added To  language after 20 and 23
let's say they are some slightly
advanced features Ok Actually I'm telling
myself I'm wrong because the Concepts are also a
way of writing S
tricky exactly that would be very tricky
but if one ends up having to write eh
conditional templates  maybe it's not really he's not
learning the language he's already reached
a point where so 17 is
a heavy thing he added I
ask you a little history of
C I remember the bulk of what
came out in c+ Plus Eleven was all the  Air
Value reference all the Move
semantics the lambda function ehm
template stuff like that until then
nothing and const
expr Ok S with Constant Expression const
expr is something that evolves with every
every version actually with every version
There's always a little bit  in more than
constexpr And precisely
c+ 17 in my opinion there is the there is the
complete set of features that are good for
a person who is starting out Ok what has
entered
new no substantially
all the details of constexpr have been refined and finalized
a minimum usable set  of constexpr
a little bit of details on the semantics of
some specifiers
like I don't want to go into too much
detail but variables in Line are
a concept
that didn't exist before c+ Plus 17
variables in lines not method variables
in
Line Exactly they follow the same semantics
of the methods in Line Yes but the method in
Line is a suggestion to the computer
to unroll arlo instead of instead of
doing a with col to function No This
was inline No no it never was but it has
always been misinterpreted precisely
because of the name  terrible that he was
given Eh then
inline is a directive mainly of
Linking the compiler implementors
tell me that there is a slight
higher chance that that method will actually be
inlined but it is not much superior and it
is not the primary functioning of
inline you are saying the
Linking directive  and so it means that in the
compiled translation units the function
is in the object is in the object
exists exists in the obj but if there are
different copies in different translation
units these are Merged at the time of
Linking if they are equal or if they are different
if  they are different one is taken at
random in theory a mechanism that nobody
knows which is very dangerous if you have two
functions they are called the same but they do two
different things it was
too much a plethora of cases that
could happen I taught c+
and I taught it therefore  bad I'm
discovering I want to understand for a moment if I
really taught it badly that is,
in the compilers that I used CH gcc and
Visual old times Visual studio was was was
also a compiler it was not an
external thing essentially an
inline function could not be implemented
in the C file  but only in the h and
then
you can implement it in a file How does it work
inline and it is simply declared
inline declared inline above Yes
simply the fact that it is
declared inline because you just have to
declare it inline the fact that it is
declared inline means that if you
implement it twice the  its
implementation will not be taken just
once and is not  an error instead
in all other cases would be a
Linking error because there is a Clash
etc.
ok clear Clear so this This is how
inline works and
inline variables allow you to no
longer require the declaration of the
definition of static variables for
example inside a class when
you have a Static
and String x and then in a CPP you should
have the colon colon X Of course
with inline you have to write inline
Static String x and not in
the initialize it So this is
this is a feature  of simp Plus 17 which
is my favorite feature of simp Plus
17 Yes but it was a bug
before it was a bug before you had to
allocate this thing somewhere Of
course it was a pear-shaped thing and they
solved the problem in a very
elegant way In my opinion  they found
a way A solution that I didn't
expect I didn't expect when I
read it I said Fantastic man of
Columbus I raise my hands
Ok ok So the C
17 Refine a bit of these things here it's
just easier to write  I mean from
that point of view there are details
like  this but in many other points there
are other things it becomes
easier to write the language Ok
Listen I wanted to take a few questions
that I had saved like 20
saved questions I'll take some at random Eh Then
after go books and
advice So this is one  question that
I often get and that I often don't know how to
answer, that is, unfortunately I haven't read
books to start from scratch for 30 years
because having studied c+ Plus 30 years
ago, the books that were there 30 years ago are
obsolete, that's
right, then stop for sure Bu but
there are pages there is also a book
that is tour of c+ Plus always by sturrup
that explains a little bit as well as
why the language was conceived in
that way eh but no no I do
n't have I don't have experience for those who
wanted to get hurt  and it's not a c+
Plus book there was the Real Time Collision
detection eh by the legendary
Ericsson Sony Santa Monica chister which
is essentially a physics book but
has a final coding part let's say
which is a masterpiece it's not exactly c+
Plus but it is  a masterpiece of low level
programming and data oriented design and
cash obliviousness but these are concepts that
go beyond language However it was
love at first sight with this book here
I enjoyed more than anything else on c+
Plus
ah let's see another question go What do you
think of Basel which is the Blaze of Google
open  source or Bu modern tools in
General So Basel I have not used it
I have heard very good things about it Every
time I had to get my
hands on it though I did not find myself
So I am let's say a fan of sake
of sake because the syntax  it's horrible of
sake It's unwatchable Yes very much but
being widely used in
industry
It's very easy to find examples Basel
has some features especially on
large scale projects that are
admirable but I struggle to find to
get my hands on the Build System when
it's written in  Basel I mean I've had two
projects that I've worked on where there was
one person in the project dedicated to
getting their hands on the Build System because
no one else on the development team
was able to understand anything about it whereas
now on our project it's in premake
which is
a tool made around
the ua is quite simple to put your
hands on all the things that  I write for myself I
now write to you in
sake cake modern a nice site that explains
in a very simple way how to make modern cake
and in my opinion it is simple i.e. Basel
is probably very interesting for
large scale projects and in fact
we are evaluating the project we
are
working on i.e.  the team that deals with the
Build System is considering switching to
bason But
honestly it has high barriers to
entry and
yes it is not among the most ordered sake no sake
it is among the most ordered now yes because it has
been improved and it has been made
ordered but the language is
unwatchable I mean it's something they
invented When they invented cake
because it was useful for them to
work it's a very old library of theirs
Yes yes at least 20
years Ok I personally can say that
with Blaze in Google it was a godu it was
really easy  writing things was
also very easy to write projects with
that Doo interact between multiple languages
so Avi the dependencies was then in
Google it was also optimized for
the environment then of actual compilation
which was Forge everything on the Cloud
so you if someone else here that  other
part n in the company in the world had already
compiled the same source  same
version you already took the object
linked by him it was a delight That is, you
once compiled Ok done but it's all
proprietary But there eh Yes especially C
you there in
Google were building on the shoulders of giants
who were on the other side of the ocean
sure sure  I mean not not because
there weren't capable people here but it's a
global structure and with a lot of
very good people
So no no Yes indeed so
unfortunately I have no outside opinions
for Blaze Forge it was among the most
beautiful things that that  that were in Google
objectively what I say is that
in the Buglio of your bedroom Maybe it's
better to
make but the Microsoft world instead no
longer uses solution files.
The sln files still exist So I
usually mind my own business  I work
a lot with Visual Studio but I use it
all with sake sake manages native sake
now ok and I stopped writing
solution files because anyway sake
allows me to if you write it in a certain
way still Ok can you confirm that yes
but if you know how to write sake  you already have
the structure exactly like that of
the Visual Studio solution But
then you can bring it to Linux and compile it
on the fly and so I don't see why anymore
Eh use in the reason why I should use
solution F Visual studio clear there are those who
ask you What motivated Marco to
go so in depth on c+ Plus Oh
how nice oh how nice then eh
initially the  fact that I wanted Eh
ok St I was trying to write a
real time retracer but it was
94 and that one in turbo Pascal
was slow and I have Imp palato c+ Plus a
RER I don't believe it come on you were if you made the
demos you wrote it in assembler
directly no  then it was much easier
it was much more compact to do Ray tracer
Than to do who knows what else Yes that's
right and in fact that was the reason why
I had made a retracer because already
at the time the polygonal engines
had reached a level of
complexity that  I didn't feel like
it, I mean laziness, laziness really, so
Ray Tracer was the laziest approach to
rendering, it meant God of
resources. Well, however, you had to write
little code, if you wrote it well you could
do it in real time and from a certain point on  point
of view was made in  real time because I
did it in
97 it was 80 x 50 but
there was the reason for Here instead I
learned c+ Plus Well scaled it was enough to
make me interpolation done
well instead the reason why I
studied it a lot was immediately after
when I was  doing an acoustic R tracer but I
owe you €1 Thanks
perione then no thanks
and
the my thesis was an
acoustic racer something that calculated the
acoustic propagation Ok through
reflections I had to get to do a
high number of reflections So I Eh
I have to calculate  20-25 reflections
at the time of the late 90s early 2000s Ok
who is not understanding it means there is an
acoustic source that you shot
acoustic rays in all directions and you saw
various bounces on the various walls and then
you had a rendering of the
sound  I don't know exactly what is meant
by listening and you had to understand what was arriving
there of all that stuff that was
reflected around the world ok
and since the problem was
quite big because in two
dimensions the thing was quite it was
relatively simple in three  dimensions
the thing was growing
Eh how can we say it the complexity
of the two dimensions was O2 the
complexity of the three dimensions was o c
with a non linear constraint in between like
the agerman
function Yes that is er a thing a
bad thing for for those who deal with
computer Vision  it's the pler space and
that is it's a beast Ugly
ugly okay without going into details
I needed to formalize very well
what I was doing but not only of of of of of
speed but also of formalizing very
well what I was doing and so
I  started studying Eh the ways to
write the code done well so
Pascal dis sorry has reached its
limits Pascal No in fact had already
reached its limits at the time at the time
of 94 Eh This one here was already were
in the early 2000s so and and there  it was
also the time when I started
using static analyzers which in
my opinion are a nowadays compilers already
do a lot at the time the compiler didn't
do much and gave you very few
errors and very few warnings eh and instead
static analyzers already at the time  at that time
they gave you a series of information  of Cod
Smell who told you that this code
is strange I don't use this I've heard this
term all my life Cod Smell yes and and
I remember having
learned to have learned to use c+
Plus
well to have deepened it
thanks to the static analyzers Yes that
I  they told me this stuff here is a
bit strange this stuff here is a bit
ugly this stuff here couldn't you
do it better
by looking for various books by mayers precisely
effective c+ Plus more effective c+ plus
there is someone who mentioned more
effective Modern c+ before  Plus now they are
kind of adding effective Modern c+
Plus is a wonderful book and
it is a book that I would recommend
reading. However unfortunately it only talks about
Plus Veven
because stuff came out in
2014-2015 as a book but it was not
updated c+ 14 and he  he withdrew
immediately after So however however it is a book
that explains then
there is no If if one wants to read a good
chapter after having studied Plus modern one
really wants to understand how the
Move
semantics the Value references etc. work
the chapter are four chapters if  I'm not
wrong, they explain  the various concepts in the
book of effective Moder c+ Plus mayers
is the one that really gives you the
deep understanding of that topic
and it's a few pages We're not talking
about 500 pages we're talking about
a few dozen pages very dense
very well
written ok  And with important examples
well structured well big big Go
lefe go break the exam break
the exam Okay then paruda
ok ioamo Fa There are some other
interesting questions if not we can also and
but has a garbage collector been implemented
for c+ plus  uh yes yes yes no
so has a garbage collector ever been implemented
for c+ Plus it was created thought
c+ Plus was thought to have a
garbage collector Yes and
the wording that allowed the garbage
collector was removed a few versions ago Ok There is a
particular reason why  no one
had ever thought of implementing it
No one
wanted it So in the end we took
note of the fact that no
one cared and we simply
said Ok then it can't be done, that is, it's
forbidden to
do it There are those
[Music] who
asked for a  stuff
about there is a market for the  compiler
engineer This here is a job that is
definitely not
the most sought after job because
objectively
those who make compilers are a lot
but it is a somewhat particular market
because many companies
have people who develop compilers
despite the core of the  'company is not
develop compilers
i.e. redat for example has people who
are in the development team of gcc or
GBC Why Because for them are Maybe
some library functions means
having a more performing system and
therefore they have a in invested in the
development of the compiler  of the library
and Google historically had a big
investment in developing
clang because the idea in the
long term was if clang allows us
to save
1% of the code more efficient than
gcc would do, we will save
total money only
energy No in Google also FR a hellow
World type in Python it became that
2 TB of executable were compiled ok
I'm not convinced that that
line prevailed and at a certain point it was a
completely opposite direction So the
reasoning was that on who worked on
the  clang compiler then I don't know
globally the company  cos had as F
the engineering cost was much higher than
the execution cost so no no
rather save Use less
eh Use less as they say
possible engineers and go like this Well but in reality
on the data center If you manage to
save the  1% of
global current on
Google Yes but the bulk was Yes the bulk
was due to the data more more more than to the
more than
to the former flow so in the end there were
huge executables for anything
i.e. ok no but anyway  Comp piler
Enger there are many in many fields
in many companies maybe even
unsuspected ones come back the good Mario Dos it
's been a while since I saw you Great
Mario question for for Marco questions to
Mario to Mario dose biarne trustrup
Mister rip Cerno with one of us  go to dinner
with one you play a game in c+ plus and with
one you
fight who With who big So no to fights
I'm a softie I'm a
softie decerno For those who don't know him
eh de bravo Mi Mi I like I like how to
describe  things sometimes he's a little
too sure of himself though  okay I mean I found him
talking nonsense but okay it must
also be said that eh It's a YouTube channel
let's understand each other to explain
things eh in a simple way sometimes
you have to say imprecise things yes maybe I
also started watching like  the
playlist on the c+ Plus and there were some
inaccuracies that I also gave but
anyway come on but I understand them with the
inaccuracies that is the functions you do
the Header Files bla bla bla
eh it was no Anyway anyway no but I mean
I liked
Stephen  T washbasins still exist Ah yes yes
yes yes in one of those in one of the photos
eh I mean there was him here stl the pirate stl
He was perfect he was really I mean
this one here yes absolutely he was a was
perfect impeccable every bite that
came out of the  his mouth was prec
and if I'm not mistaken he was an stl
developer in Microsoft and his name is
stl Exactly that is his name is Stefan T
lav and he developed stl it's fantastic as a
thing No there is a person that I
really like but his videos  I am  a bit
old now I don't know what happened it's
the good
stl 10 years ago now I see it
2015-2016 The Pirate Yes not honestly
I haven't even seen it anymore
[Music]
in the Committee not Ok but the series on
Core c+  Plus and on the Core standard library
were in my opinion unreachable 10 years
ago that was the effort of
Microsoft the last important effort of Microsoft
to make the library that
maintained binary compatibility with
previous versions until 2015 eh
the  Microsoft libraries changed every version
and therefore had a
new dynamic library behind it which was the
runtime of the system m since 2017 I
think instead you have a library which is
always the same and underneath it evolves but
remaining with binary compatibility
towards the past  ok ok ok
so it was a That that there
library of courses Plus Plus was
really one of the most
important evolutions In my opinion of recent face studies
Marco I thank you very much
who who wants who has further questions
then now Maybe with Marco It could be
that  now let's see. We'll organize something
another thing
we'll do I'd like to start
writing code again a bit talking about c+ Plus
writing c+ Plus also doing some
mini lessons on basic basic basic concepts
the ones I can do that I
remember and maybe Marco I'll invite him
to do some  let's see what
maybe a bit of code review on
Mister Rip's code or a little lesson on
advanced concepts and
I hope Eh that of the Cod review among
other things is one of the things I do
in the live ones I mean if someone
sends me code I  I do the code
review usually riew Ah but you
still do live still
very rarely very
rarely we are a bit where it is but
recently I haven't done I haven't done much
Look I did a couple of things a few
weeks ago but very rarely  scaz p
spanning spinning Kids spinning
Pan
spinning
Kids here you are ehm
For those who want You've been a while you have
n't streamed 12 days ago Well every now and then
Every now and then yes yes you do code review you do
code review you speak c+ Plus you write code
live typically  that
Sometimes I also do something of ai But
usually it's c+ Plus vi  I'm leaving it here in the
chat Ok Oops Where are you Here we are good
Marco Thank you so much It was a
pleasure thank you we'll talk again soon
absolutely Hi everyone guys
goodnight and see you tomorrow with me
for tomorrow's live A little light a
few more things  read Hello everyone